Restructure obsv overview (#13119)
kyma-project/kyma: docs/01-overview/main-areas/observability/README.md

Out of the box, Kyma provides tools to collect and expose **telemetry** data, such as metrics, traces, and log data. Of course, you'll want to view and analyze the data you're collecting. This is where **observability** tools come in.

## Collecting data

Kyma collects telemetry data with several in-cluster components:

- [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction) collects metrics from Pods. Metrics are the time-stamped data that provide information on the running jobs, workload, CPU consumption, memory usage, and more. All metrics relevant for observing the in-cluster Istio Service Mesh are collected separately.

- [Fluent Bit](https://fluentbit.io/) collects logs.

- Traces are sent to [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs).

The collected telemetry data are exposed so that you can view and analyze them with observability tools.

## Analyzing data

You can use the following in-cluster components to observe your applications' telemetry data:

> - [Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/alertmanager/) receives and manages alerts coming from Prometheus. It can then forward the notifications about fired alerts to specific channels, such as Slack or an on-call paging system of your choice.
> - [Grafana](https://grafana.com/docs/guides/getting_started/) provides a dashboard and a graph editor to visualize metrics collected from Prometheus.
> - Kyma uses [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/) as a backend, which serves as the query mechanism for displaying information about traces.
> - Kyma uses [Loki](https://github.com/grafana/loki), which is a lightweight Prometheus-like log management system.
> - Kyma uses [Kiali](https://www.kiali.io) to enable validation, observe the Istio Service Mesh, and provide details on microservices included in the Service Mesh and connections between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Kyma uses [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction), which is a lightweight backend for metrics.
- Kyma uses [Loki](https://github.com/grafana/loki), which is a lightweight Prometheus-like backend for logs.
- Kyma uses [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/) as a backend, which serves as the query mechanism for displaying information about traces.

- [Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/alertmanager/) receives and manages alerts coming from Prometheus. It can then forward the notifications about fired alerts to specific channels, such as Slack or an on-call paging system of your choice.
- [Grafana](https://grafana.com/docs/guides/getting_started/) provides a dashboard and a query editor to visualize metrics and logs collected from Prometheus and Loki.
- Kyma uses [Kiali](https://www.kiali.io) to enable validation, observe the Istio Service Mesh, and provide details on microservices included in the Service Mesh and connections between them.
```

I mainly added prometheus here as it is a collector and a backend at the same time

title: What is Observability in Kyma?
---

> Modern cloud applications consist of multiple components that can be scaled and deployed individually, and are focused on one concern using the most fitting technology - essentially, they're distributed systems. Monitoring such an application requires re-thinking: It's no longer an action you apply to a specific component, instead applications must actively expose insights! Monitoring becomes a federated aspect for all components, where every single component must actively expose its internal state.

Author: This paragraph explains the motivation/vision behind the Kyma Observability concept. It's not strictly technical but considering the README is the first point of contact with the topic, I think it could be justified.

> Modern cloud applications consist of multiple components that can be scaled and deployed individually, and are focused on one concern using the most fitting technology - essentially, they're distributed systems. Monitoring such an application requires re-thinking: It's no longer an action you apply to a specific component, instead applications must actively expose insights! Monitoring becomes a federated aspect for all components, where every single component must actively expose its internal state.

Author: I think it's still valuable to keep the change of "direction" - metrics aren't "pulled" anymore, but actively "pushed" by the component. I'll propose a compromise between your suggestion and the earlier version.

> Modern cloud applications consist of multiple components that can be scaled and deployed individually, and are focused on one concern using the most fitting technology - essentially, they're distributed systems. Monitoring such an application requires re-thinking: It's no longer an action you apply to a specific component, instead applications must actively expose insights! Monitoring becomes a federated aspect for all components, where every single component must actively expose its internal state.

Author: removed with https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/pull/13119/commits/4e6932d2eff1afc834ed9a341ce6f0717e952f22

> Thus, the term "Observability" can be defined as a measure of how well internal states can be inferred from the application's external outputs. The insights that are  exposed are called "telemetry" or "signals" - usually metrics, traces and logs. They can be exposed by employing modern instrumentation.

Author: About the 2nd sentence, see next comment :) 

I'm open to rearranging the order of paragraphs.

> Modern cloud applications consist of multiple components that you can scale and deploy individually, and are focused on one concern using the most fitting technology - essentially, they're distributed systems. Monitoring such an application is no longer an action you apply to a specific component; instead applications must actively expose insights. Monitoring becomes a joint aspect for all components, where every single component must actively expose its internal state.

Reviewer 2: I still don't think this paragraph brings a lot of value to the document. It could be cut out and the document would be shorter and more concise without losing any information the user needs when reading about observability in Kyma.

`essentially, they're distributed systems` -> does it relate to these modern applications?

Maybe we can make this paragraph a bit more concise? I 
`Monitoring aims at covering all applications in distributed systems instead of focusing on a single component.`
Let's discuss this separately.

Author: Removed with https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/pull/13119/commits/4e6932d2eff1afc834ed9a341ce6f0717e952f22

> Out of the box, Kyma provides tools to collect and expose **telemetry** data, such as metrics, traces, and log data. Of course, you'll want to view and analyze the data you're collecting. This is where **observability** tools come in.

Author: The current split has the future setup in mind, when (out-of-the-box) in-cluster monitoring is not the only option anymore. The previous sentence is true for both options, but this sentence specifically talks about in-cluster monitoring.

## Collecting data

Kyma collects telemetry data with several in-cluster components:

- [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction) collects metrics from Pods. Metrics are the time-stamped data that provide information on the running jobs, workload, CPU consumption, memory usage, and more. All metrics relevant for observing the in-cluster Istio Service Mesh are collected separately.

- [Fluent Bit](https://fluentbit.io/) collects logs.

- Traces are sent to [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs).

The collected telemetry data are exposed so that you can view and analyze them with observability tools.

## Analyzing data

You can use the following in-cluster components to observe your applications' telemetry data:

> - Kyma uses [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction), which is a lightweight backend for metrics.

Author: Agree!
